# Assignment

2. [ Single student or 2 student team project ] Go to the [RISC V website](https://riscv.org/risc-v-foundation/) and *download the RISC V ISA simulator along with the complete tool chain* **(C
compiler, assembler, linker, loader, debugger, etc.)**. Configure this software if necessary
and get it running on your computer. If successful, you will have:

- a tool chain for which you can compile C programs into RISC V binaries
- an assembler for assembling RISC V assembly programs
- a linker for linking a C main program with one or more assembly language programs
- a RISC V-ISA simulator which can run the compiled/assembled and linked generated binaries from select C and Assembly language programming assignments.

Finally, you are to submit a *written report of your experience* with this installation documenting all the hurdles and missteps you had to deal with to make this work.
The document should include output screenshots of sample C and Assembly programs compiled with the toolchain and run in simulation.

## What is RISC-V ?
RISC-V (pronounced “risk-five”) is a new instruction set architecture (ISA) that was originally designed to support computer architecture research and education and is now set to become a standard open architecture for industry implementations under the governance of the RISC-V Foundation. The RISC-V ISA was originally developed in the Computer Science Division of the EECS Department at the University of California, Berkeley.

> An instruction set, with its instruction set architecture (ISA), is the interface between a computer's software and its hardware, and thereby enables the independent development of these two computing realms; it defines the valid instructions that a machine may execute.

- A completely open ISA that is freely available to academia and industry.
- A real ISA suitable for direct native hardware implementation, not just simulation or binary translation.
- An ISA that avoids “over-architecting” for a particular microarchitecture style (e.g., microcoded, in-order, decoupled, out-of-order) or implementation technology (e.g., full-custom, ASIC, FPGA), but which - allows efficient implementation in any of these.
- An ISA separated into a small base integer ISA, usable by itself as a base for customized accelerators or for educational purposes, and optional standard extensions, to support general-purpose software development.
- Support for the revised 2008 IEEE-754 floating-point standard.
- An ISA supporting extensive user-level ISA extensions and specialized variants.
- 32-bit, 64-bit, and 128-bit address space variants for applications, operating system kernels, and hardware implementations.
- An ISA with support for highly-parallel multicore or manycore implementations, including heterogeneous multiprocessors.
- Optional variable-length instructions to both expand available instruction encoding space and to support an optional dense instruction encoding for improved performance, static code size, and energy efficiency.
- A fully virtualizable ISA to ease hypervisor development.
- An ISA that simplifies experiments with new supervisor-level and hypervisor-level ISA designs.

Our intent is to provide a long-lived open ISA with significant infrastructure support, including documentation, compiler tool chains, operating system ports, reference software simulators, cycle-accurate FPGA emulators, high-performance FPGA computers, efficient ASIC implementations of various target platform designs, configurable processor generators, architecture test suites, and teaching materials.

### What is the toolchain ?

- *riscv-gnu-toolchain*, a RISC-V cross-compiler
- *riscv-fesvr*, a "front-end" server that services calls between the host and target processors on the Host-Target InterFace (HTIF) (it also provides a virtualized console and disk device)
- *riscv-isa-sim*, the ISA simulator and "golden standard" of execution
- *riscv-opcodes*, the enumeration of all RISC-V opcodes executable by the simulator
- *riscv-pk*, a proxy kernel that services system calls generated by code built and linked with the RISC-V Newlib port (this does not apply to Linux, as it handles the system calls)
- *riscv-tests*, a set of assembly tests and benchmarks

### What is Newlib ?

[Newlib](http://www.sourceware.org/newlib/) is a "C library intended for use on embedded systems."

## Useful Links
- [RISC-V Fundation Website](https://riscv.org/risc-v-foundation/)
- [interactive session of riscv-linux on a simulated RISC-V](https://riscv.org/software-tools/riscv-angel/)
- [UC Berkeley Architecture Research projects page](http://bar.eecs.berkeley.edu/projects.html)

Right now, you can download the [final user-level ISA specification](https://riscv.org/specifications/), a [draft compressed ISA specification](https://riscv.org/specifications/compressed-isa/), a [draft privileged ISA specification](https://riscv.org/specifications/privileged-isa/), and a suite of [RISC-V software tools](https://riscv.org/software-tools/)
